---
layout: article
title: Extra topic 1:Palindrome and Manacher algorithm
tags: Bioinformatic_Algorithm
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: Bioinformatic_Algorithm

---

A DNA string is a **reverse palindrome** if it is equal to its reverse complement. For instance, $\textbf{ATGCAT}$ is a reverse palindrome, because its reverse string $\textbf{TACGTA}$ can complementarily match to origin string. 

$$
\begin{align*}
& \text{ATGCAT}\\
& \mid \,\; \mid \,\; \mid \,\; \mid \,\; \mid \,\; \mid \,\\
& \text{TACGTA}
\end{align*}
$$

This phenomenon is quite common in our DNA or RNA sequences. We hope to find all occurrences of reverse palindrome in text $T$. In fact, there are at most $\Theta(n^2)$ palindrome substring in text with length $\vert T \vert = n$. In this blog, we will first give a naïve algorithm and use Manacher algorithm to solve this problem in $\mathcal{O}(n)$. In fact, we can do lowest common accessor on Suffix tree to implement this also, which will be introduced in [Extra topic 2](https://wu-haonan.github.io/2024/01/24/BA_Ext_2.html). 

In this topic, we also consider other problem which is quite similar to above problem. Instead of consider reverse palindrome, we only consider **symmetric string** that is $T = T^\text{R}$ here $T^\text{R}$ is the reverse string of $T$, so in this case we have odd and even symmetric string. For example, $\textbf{ATGGTA}$ and $\textbf{ATGCGTA}$. 

<!--more-->

# Naïve Algorithm

We iterate each character in text from start to end. In each position, we try to treat it as a center (odd and even center) and extend longer. For $i$th character, we need compare at most $i$ pairs of character, so the total running time would be $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$. 

In fact, we can represent palindrome or symmetric string in a more compact way. For example, $\textbf{ATGCGTA}$ has three symmetric substrings with $\text{C}$ as center, which equals to the longest length of radius of symmetric substring with $\text{C}$ as center.

Hence, for each position $i$ in text $T$, we can record the odd/even symmetric substring with $i$th character as center. So, we define array $d_o[i],d_e[i]$ for the longest radius or number of odd/even symmetric substrings that take $i$th character as center. 

$$
\begin{aligned}
\underbrace{\cdots \text{ATGCGTA} \cdots}_{d_o[i]=3} \\
\underbrace{\cdots \text{ATGGTA} \cdots}_{d_e[i]=3}
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus, the size of arrays are $\Theta(n)$, which inspire us to have a linear time algorithm. 



# Manacher Algorithm

To describe the algorithm, we only consider the odd cases here, but notice that even cases can be solved in similar way. 

## Main idea

During the process of whole algorithm, we always maintain the rightmost symmetric substring $[\ell,r]$, where $\ell,r$ is the left and right bound. We iterate the text string from start to end. Suppose we need to calculate $d_o[i]$ in this loop, and we have already known all the numbers of $d_o[k], k<i$. Now, we have several case

* If $i>r$, we use naïve algorithm to extend it, until we find mismatch. And, we record the radius of longest symmetric substring as $d_o[i]$. 

* If $i \leq r$, we can try to employ the information from previous "knowledge". Because we already know the information of symmetric position of $i$ in $[\ell,r]$, namely $j = \ell + (r-i)$th position. 

	* If $i+d_o[j] < r$, we have following case

    $$
    \cdots \overbrace{ s_\ell \cdots \underbrace{s_{j - d_o[j]} \cdots s_j \cdots s_{j + d_o[j]}}_{\text{ longest sym-substring on } s_j} \cdots \underbrace{s_{i-d_o[j]} \cdots s_i \cdots s_{i+d_o[j]}}_{\text{symmetric substring on } s_i} \cdots s_r}^{\text{rightmost symmetric substring }[\ell,r]} \cdots
    $$

	Because $s_{i-d_o[j]} \cdots s_i \cdots s_{i+d_o[j]}$ is still in the range of $[\ell,r]$, we can directly assert that this symmetric substring is longest with $s_i$ as center. We don't update rightmost symmetric substring in this case. 
	
	* If $i+d_o[j] \geq r$, we know $[i-(r-i),r]$ is a symmetric substring with $s_i$ as center, but we don't know if it's longest, so we need to explore the toward two side. That is 

	$$
	\cdots \overbrace{\underbrace{s_{\ell} \cdots s_j \cdots s_{j + (r-i)}}_{\text{ longest sym-substring on } s_j} \cdots \underset{?\leftarrow}{\cdots} \underbrace{s_{i-(r-i)} \cdots s_i \cdots s_{r}}_{\text{symmetric substring on } s_i}}^{\text{rightmost symmetric substring }[\ell,r]} \underset{\rightarrow ?}{\cdots}
	$$

	So, we need to do more comparisons to explore it. After that, we record $d_o[i]$ and update $[\ell,r]$ as $[i-d_o[i], i+d_o[i]]$.

For the even cases, we can easily have similar way to solve. 

## Implement odd and even cases simultaneously

Instead of fill arrays $d_o,d_e$ separately, we can insert \# ahead of each character and the end of the string, for example

$$
\text{ATGCAT} \rightarrow \text{\#A\#T\#G\#C\#A\#T\#}
$$

It's clear that each \# symbol is located at even position and each origin character located at odd position (start from $0$). Hence, we can apply Manacher algorithm only for odd-length symmetric substring, and denote array $d$.  Then, we know $d[2i+2]=2d_e[i],d[2i+1] = 2d_o[i]$.

## Running time

At each iteration,  we conduct comparisons and other part takes, which constant time. When we do a comparison, $r$ will **exactly increase one**,  when $r= \vert S \vert $, we don't need to do comparisons anymore. Hence, the total number of comparisons is $\mathcal{O}(n)$. So, the total running time will be $\mathcal{O}(n)$. 

# Reverse Palindrome

Basically, the similar procedure with above symmetric substring. We describe it as below

* If $i>r$, we check if $(S[i],S[i+1]), (S[i-1],S[i+2]) \cdots $ these character pairs are **complementary pairing**, i.e $\textbf{A} - \textbf{T}, \textbf{G} - \textbf{C}$. Until we find mismatch, then we stop and record the radius of longest palindrome substring as $d[i]$.

* If $i \leq r$, we can try to employ the information from previous "knowledge". Because we already know the information of symmetric position of $i$ in $[\ell,r]$, namely $j = \ell + (r-i)  - 1$th position.

  * If $i+d[j] < r$, we have following case

	$$
  \cdots \overbrace{ s_\ell \cdots \underbrace{s_{j - d[j] + 1} \cdots s_j s_{j+1} \cdots s_{j + d[j]}}_{\text{longest palindrome on } s_j} \cdots \underbrace{s_{i-d[j]+1} \cdots s_i s_{i+1} \cdots s_{i+d[j]}}_{\text{palindrome on } s_i } \cdots s_r}^{\text{rightmost palindrome }[\ell,r]} \cdots
	$$
  
	Because $s_{i-d[j]+1} \cdots s_i s_{i+1} \cdots s_{i+d[j]}$ is still in the range of $[\ell,r]$, we can directly assert that this palindrome is longest with $s_i$ as center. We don't update rightmost palindrome in this case.
	
	* If $i+d[j] \geq r$, we know $[i-(r-i-1), r]$ is a palindrome with $s_i$ as center, but we don't know if it's longest, so we need to explore the toward two side. That is 

	$$
    \cdots \overbrace{\underbrace{s_{\ell} \cdots s_j s_{j+1} \cdots s_{j + (r-i)}}_{\text{palindrome on } s_j} \cdots \underset{?\leftarrow}{\cdots} \underbrace{s_{i-(r-i-1)} \cdots s_i s_{i+1} \cdots s_{r}}_{\text{palindrome on } s_i}}^{\text{rightmost palindrome }[\ell,r]} \underset{\rightarrow ?}{\cdots}
	$$

	So, we need to do more comparisons to explore it. After that, we record $d[i]$ and update $[\ell,r]$ as $[i-d[i]+1, i+d[i]]$.
	

Here, we show the pseudocode 

{% highlight pseudocode linenos %}
Pair(s,t)
    If s == "A" & t == "T"
        return True
    elif s == "T" & t == "A"
        return True
    elif s == "C" & t == "G"
        return True
    elif s == "G" & t == "C"
        return True
    else
        return False

Find-Reverse-Palindrome(S)
    // Initialization
    d = [0]*n \\ longest redius of palindrome with ith as center
    l = 0
    r = -1
    
    // Iteration for each character
    for i = 0 to n
        if i > r // extend by comparisons
            k = 0
            while 0 <= i-k & i+k+1 < n & Pair(s[i-k], s[i+k+1]):
                k += 1
            d[i] = k
            // Update [l,r]
            l = i - d[i] + 1
            r = i + d[i]
        else
            j = l + (r-j) + 1 // symmetric position
            if i + d[j] < r // directly copy
                d[i] = d[j]
            else
                k = min(d[j], r -i)
                while 0 <= i-k & i+k+1 < n & Pair(s[i-k], s[i+k+1]):
                    k += 1
                    d[i] = k
                // Update [l,r]
                l = i - d[i] + 1
                r = i + d[i]
    return d
{% endhighlight %}