---
layout: post
title: Dynamic Programming:RNA secondary strucure problem, Sequence alignment, Multiple sequence alignment
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
categories: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

This lecture continues to talk about Dynamic Programming, we are going to introduce RNA secondary stucture problem and squence alignment problem. 

<!--more-->

# Dynamic Programming

## RNA secondary structure

In biology, RNA is a string ${ s_1,\cdots,s_n }$ over ${ \{A,C,G,U\} }$. And, it's tries to form base pairs with itself by folding back.

The set of base pairs formed by RNA moleculars by this process is called "secondary structure". 

Definition: "<b>Secondary Structure</b>" is a set of pairs ${ S = \{ (s_i, s_j) \} }$ satisfying the following properties

1. Watson-Crick rule

Allowed pairs: A-U, U-A, G-C, C-G

2. No sharp turn:

If ${ (s_i, s_j) \in S }$ then ${ i < j - 4 }$

3. No crossing: 

If ${ (s_i,s_j), (s_k ,s_{\ell}) \in S}$, they don't crossing.

* <b>Objective</b>:

Given RNA sequence ${ s_1,\cdots,s_n }$, find a secondary structure ${ S }$ that <b>maximizes</b> the total number of matching pairs.

### Idea

We define the subproblem as 

${ OPT(i,j) =  }$ maximum number of matched pairs in ${ s_i, \cdots,s_j }$

So, there are several cases

Case 1: If ${ i \geq j -4 }$, it's a sharp turn, we can not match them ${ OPT(i,j) = 0 }$

Case 2: If ${ s_j }$ is not matched with any charcter in ${ s_i, \cdots, s_{j-1} }$, so 

<center>$$
OPT(i,j) = OPT(i,j-1)
$$</center>

Case 3: ${ s_j }$ can be matched with ${ s_k }$ where ${ i \leq k < j -4 }$. Assume ${ s_k }$ and ${ s_j }$ are matched, because we can not do crossing match, so we have to find optimal match solution from ${ i }$ to ${ k-1 }$ and ${ k+1 }$
 to ${ j-1 }$


<center>$$
OPT(i,j) = 1 + \max_{ i \leq k < j -4, \text{and } \atop  s_j, s_k \text{ can match}} \{ OPT(i,k-1)+OPT(k+1,j-1)\}
$$</center>

### pseudocode

{% highlight pseudocode linenos %}
RNA_Folding(s_1,s_2,...,s_n)
    // Initialization DP matrix
    for i = 1 ... n 
        for j = 1 ... n
            M[i,j] = 0
    for k = 5,6,...,n-1 //iterate all the distance of interval
        for i = 1...n-k //iterate all the starting position
            j = i + k
            M[i,j] = Compute_Folding(s_i,...,s_j)
    Return M[1,n]

Compute_Folding(s_i,...,s_j)
    for t = i,i+1,...,j-5
        if s_t and s_j are matched
            M[i,j] = max{M[i,j],1+M[i,t-1]+M[t+1,j-1]} //We keep M[i,j] store maxinum in each comparision, finnaly we get the maxinum for all situation. If there is no s_t to match s_j, M[i,j] still keep 0
{% endhighlight %}

### runing time

The runing time is ${ O\left((n-k)(5+6+\cdots+n-1) \right) = O(n^3)}$

## Sequence Alignment

We have two ways to define this problem

<b>Longest Common Subsequence (LCS)</b> and <b>Edit Distance (ED)</b>.

Given two strings ${ x [1\cdots m] }$, ${ y [1\cdots n ] }$, their LCS is the longest subsequence that is present in both ${ x,y }$ (Note: subsequences are not required to occupy consecutive positions within the original sequences)

Edit distance between ${ x,y }$ is the minmum number of character insetion, deltion and substitution required to convert ${ x }$ to ${ y }$.

If the allowed edit operations are only intertion and deletion, the ${ ED = n + m - 2\vert LCS \vert }$

triangle inequality ${ d(x,z) \leq d(u,y) + d(y,z) }$ not satisfy for ED

### Dynamic Programming for LCS

We can define the subproblem as 

<center>$$
OPT[i,j] = LCS(x[1,...,i],y[1,...,j])
$$</center>

And, we give the state transition equation

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
OPT[i,j] = 
\begin{cases}
OPT[i-1,j-1]+1, &\text{ if } x[i] = y[i], \\
\max\{OPT[i-1,j],OPT[i,j-1]\}, &\text{ if } x[i] \neq y[i].
\end{cases}
\end{equation}
$$</center>

### Correctness

Case 1: If ${ x[i] \neq y[j] }$, we can align them, we need to delete at least one. Thus

<center>$$
OPT[i,j] = \max\{OPT[i-1,j],OPT[i,j-1]\}
$$</center>

Case 2: If ${ x[i] = y[j] }$, we will prove following claim

* Claim: ${ OPT[i,j] = OPT[i-1,j-1]+1  }$

Proof. we suppose we don't match them, and we will deduce controdiction.

If we delete both of them, the largest common sequence of ${ x[1...i],y[1...j] }$ is ${ OPT[i-1,j-1] }$, which less than ${ OPT[i-1,j-1]+1 }$, which contridicts to optimal solution.

If we delete either of them, without loss generality, we delete ${ x[i] }$, and align ${ y[j] }$ to ${ x[k], k< i }$

Now, optimal value is ${ OPT[i,j] = OPT[k-1,j-1] + 1 }$. But obviously, ${ OPT[k-1,j-1] \leq OPT[i-1,j-1] }$, which contradicts to optimal value. 

Hence,${ OPT[i,j] = OPT[i-1,j-1]+1  }$. QED.

### Pseudocode

{% highlight pseudocode linenos %}
Longest_Common_Subsequence(x[1...m],y[1...n])
    // Initialization of DP matrix
    for (i= 0 to m)
        for (j = to n)
            M[i,j] = 0
    for i = 1 to m //itertate eles in x
        for j = 1 to n // iterate eles in y
            If x[i] = y[j]
                M[i,j] = 1 + M[i-1,j-1]
            else 
                M[i,j] = max{M[i-1,j],M[i,j-1]}
    return M[m,n] 
{% endhighlight %}

### Running time and Space

It's easy to check the running time is ${ O(nm) }$. (We have ${ O(mn) }$ entries and each entry consume ${ O(1) }$)

It seems that the space complexity is ${ O(nm) }$, but we don't need to store all value, we just need store last row/colunm, so space is ${ O(min\{n,m\}) }$. (Because we only need ${ M[i-1,j-1],M[i,j-1],M[i-1,j] }$ to get the ${ M[i,j] }$)

## LCS for multiple sequences

Given ${ \ell }$ strings ${ x^1,...,x^\ell }$

<center>$$
x^i = x^i_1 \cdots x^i_{m_i}
$$</center>

Our goal is finding the LCS of these ${  \ell}$ sequences.

We can define a subproblem similar with pairwise sequence alignment.

${OPT[i_1,i_2,\cdots,i_\ell] = }$ the longest common sequence of ${ x^1[1...x_{i_1}],x^2[1...x_{i_2}],\cdots,x^\ell[1...x_{i_\ell}] }$

### Idea

If ${ x^1_{i_1}= x^2_{i_2}=\cdots=\cdots=x^3_{i_\ell} }$, we can match all the each current element from each squence.

<center>$$
OPT[i_1,i_2,\cdots,i_\ell] = 1 + OPT[i_1-1,i_2-1,\cdots,i_\ell-1]
$$</center>

Else, they don't match to each other, we can recursivly find the optimal solution. That is we choose the maxinum plan from following OPT value

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
OPT[i_1,i_2,\cdots,i_\ell] = \max \left\{
    \begin{aligned}
    OPT&[i_1-1,i_2,\cdots,i_\ell], \\
    OPT&[i_1,i_2-1,\cdots,i_\ell], \\
    &\vdots \\
    OPT&[i_1,i_2,\cdots,i_\ell-1]. \\
    \end{aligned} 
\right\}
\end{equation}
$$</center> 

### Running time

The DP matrix have ${ O(m_1\cdot m_2 \cdot \cdots m_\ell) }$ entries, and each entry need ${ O(\ell) }$ time. So, total running time is ${ O(\ell \cdot m_1\cdot m_2 \cdot \cdots m_\ell) }$

