---
layout: article
title: Intro Appro Alg:Definition and LP techniques
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
---

From this blog, we begin to focus on approximation algorithms. And, this blog will talking about the defnition of approximation alogirthm and the techniques of analysis through Linear Programming.

<!--more-->

# ${ \alpha }$-approximation algorithm

An ${ \alpha }$-approximation algorithm for an optimization problem is <b>a polynomial-time algorithm</b> that for all instances of the problem produces a solution for which the value is within a factor of ${ \alpha }$ of the value of an optimal solution.

For ${ \alpha }$-approximation algorithm, that means:

1. The algorithm runs in polynomial time.

2. The algorithm always produces a feasible solution.

3. The value is within a factor ${ \alpha }$ of the value of an optimal solution. (Here, ${ \alpha >1 }$, ${ OPT(I) }$ means the optimal solution of instance ${ I }$, and ${ A(I) }$ means the value generated by approximation algorithm ${ A }$ of instance ${ I }$.)

    * For max optimization ${ \frac{OPT(I)}{A(I)} \leq \alpha }$

    * For min optimization ${ \frac{A(I)}{OPT(I)} \leq \alpha }$

And a common stratege for prove an approximation algorithm within a factor ${ \alpha }$ is (take min optimazation as an example): 

1. Find an lower bound ${ u }$ of ${ OPT }$, that is ${ OPT \geq u }$

2. Find an upper bound ${ l }$ of ${ A }$, that is ${ l \geq A }$

3. Prove ${ l \leq \alpha u }$, that is ${ A \leq l \leq \alpha u \leq OPT }$


# LP techniques (Vertex Cover as Example)

Let's consider vertex cover problem.

Give a graph ${ G=(V,E) }$, find a subset of vertices ${ S \subseteq V }$, such that each edge has an endpoint in the set ${ S }$. Our goal is to minimize ${ \vert S \vert }$.

## Algorithm ${ \mathcal{A} }$

Find a maximal matching ${ M }$ and add all endpoints of the edges in ${ M }$ to ${ S }$.

Steps: Choose the edges one by one (if the egde is compatiable to already-selected edges) until no edges can be added anymore.

<b>Therorem:</b> Algorithm ${ \mathcal{A} }$ is a ${ 2 }$-approximation algorithm of Vertex Cover Problem.

Proof.

1. Polynomial run-time: It's clear to see the number of loops is ${ O(\vert E \vert ) }$.

2. Feasibility: Suppose there exists edge ${ e \in E }$ that is not covered, that means both endpoints of ${ e }$ are not in ${ S }$. So ${ e\notin M }$. Then we can add ${ e }$ to ${ M }$, because ${ e }$ don't have any overlap endpoints with ${ M }$. So, we get a bigger matching which contradicts to ${ M }$ is maximal matching. 

3. ${ 2 }$-approximation: 
    * The edges in ${ M }$ can not share endpoints to each other, that implies ${ \vert S \vert = 2 \vert M \vert }$.
    * The optimal vertex cover needs to cover all the edges in ${ M }$, that means the optimal solution have to contain at least one endpoint of each edge in ${ M }$. And all edges in ${ M }$ can not share endpoints to each other. So ${ OPT \geq \vert M \vert }$
    * ${ \vert S \vert = 2 \vert M \vert \leq 2 OPT }$, that is ${ \frac{S}{OPT} \leq 2 }$

Hence, Algorithm ${ \mathcal{A} }$ is a ${ 2 }$-approximation algorithm. ${ \square }$

## Algorithm ${ \mathcal{B} }$