---
layout: post
title: Gready Alg and Local Search:Minimum-Degree Spanning Tree
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
categories: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

This blog is still talking about greedy algorithm and local search. And this blog will focus on 
the minimum-degree Spanning Tree problem.

<!--more-->

# Statement of Problem

**Minimum-degree spanning trees:**

- Instance: Graph $G = (V, E)$ with $\vert V\vert = n$.

- Solution: Find a spanning tree $T$ of $G$.

- Objective: minimize the maximum degree of vertices in $T$.

Note: A spanning tree has maximum degree two **iff** it is a Hamiltonian path. And deciding if a graph has a Hamiltonian path is NP complete.

**Theorem:** Given a graph it is NP-complete to decide whether it has a spanning tree of maximum degree two.



# Main idea of Local Search Algorithm

Start with arbitrary spanning tree $T$

To reduce degree of vertex $u$ with high ${d_T(u)}$, find all edge ${\{v, w\}}$ s.t. ${T + \{v, w\}}$ create a cycle with $u$. If $\max\{d_T(v), d_T(w)\} \leq d_T(u) - 2$; We can pick up an edge $e$ in this cycle which is also incident to node ${u}$. Then we create $T' = T - e + (v, w)$ (we call it a local move).

Note: $d_{T'}(u) = d_T(u) - 1$ and $\max\{d_T(v), d_T(w)\} \leq d_T(u) - 2 + 1 = d_T(u) - 1$. That means we indeed reduce the degree in this local part of the spanning tree.

In polynomial time, we can do local move on very high degree vertices.



# Algorithm and Analysis

## Local Search Algorithm:

- Step 1: Start with arbitrary spanning tree $T$. Let ${\Delta(T) = \max_{u \in V} d_T(u); l = \left\lceil \log n \right\rceil}$

- Step 2: pick a node $u$ with degree at least $\Delta(T) - l$ and try to reduce its degree by local move.

- Step 3: Stop if no improvement possible for any node $u$ with degree at least $\Delta(T) - l$.

## Approximation Analysis

Let's first analysis the approximation of algorithm. 

**Theorem:** Let $T^\*$ be a locally optimal tree. Then ${\Delta(T^\*) \leq 2OPT + l, l = \left\lceil \log n \right\rceil}$

1. We can first find the lower bound of $OPT$. Let's remove $k$ edges from $T$; this creates $k + 1$ connected components.

  - Let's denote the set $S$ of nodes such that each $e \in E$ connecting two of the $k + 1$ components is incident on $S$. (In another word, we find all the edge in $G$ that connected any pair of the components, and we pick up the nodes of these edge in set $S$.)

  - For any spanning tree of $G$, it must have at least $k$ edges with endpoints in these $k+1$ different components.

  - For any spanning tree of $G$ average degree (here means the degree in the the spanning tree instead of the degree in $G$) of a node in $S$ is at least $\frac{k}{\vert S \vert }$. (If we want to connect to component, we have to add an edge with an endpoint in $S$, so the sum of degree of each note in $S$ is at least $k$, which implies the average degree is at least $\frac{k}{\vert S \vert }$.)

  - Hence we have $OPT \geq \max_{s \in S}\{d_T(s)\} \geq \frac{k}{\vert S \vert}$.

2. Let $S_i$ be the set of nodes with degree at least $i$ in $T^*$.

**Claim 1:** For each $S_i$, with $i \geq \Delta(T) - l + 1$:

  a) there are at least $(i - 1)\vert S_i \vert + 1$ distinct edges of $T^*$ incident on $S_i$.

  b) after removing these edges, any edge connecting two different components are incident on $S_{i-1}$.

**Claim 2:** $\exists i \geq \Delta(T) - l + 1$ s.t. $\vert S_{i-1} \vert \leq 2\vert S_i \vert$.



By claim 2, we can find such $i$ and take $S = S_{i-1}$, then we have 

$$
OPT \geq  \frac{(i-1)\vert S_i\vert + 1}{\vert S_{i-1} \vert } \geq \frac{(i-1)\vert S_i \vert + 1}{2 \vert S_i \vert } \geq \frac{i-1}{2} + \frac{1}{2 \vert S_i \vert} \geq (\Delta(T)-l)/2 \geq (\Delta(T^*)-l)/2
$$

Note, here we don't know exactly the edge set that will generate set $S_{i-1}$. But, we can observe the node set $S_{i}$, if we remove all the edges of $T^\*$ that are incident on $S_i$, we can get $S_{i-1}$. In this process, we know $k \geq (i - 1) \vert S_i \vert + 1$. Thus, we can use the conclusion $OPT \geq \frac{k}{\vert S \vert}$. Additionally, we do local move for these high degree nodes, so $\Delta(T) \geq \Delta(T^\*)$.

Hence, we prove the theorem. $\square$



Now, I will show the proof of above claims that are not trivial. 



**Claim 1:** For each $S_i$, with $i \geq \Delta(T) - l + 1$:

  a) there are at least $(i - 1)\vert S_i\vert + 1$ distinct edges of $T^*$ incident on $S_i$.

  b) after removing these edges,  any edge connecting two different components are incident on $S_{i-1}$.



**Proof.** 

a) there are at least $(i - 1)\vert S_i\vert + 1$ distinct edges of $T^*$ incident on $S_i$.

There are at least $i\vert S_i \vert$ edges of $T^\*$ incident on nodes of $S_i$ as each vertex of $S_i$ has degree at least $i$. Because $T^\*$ is a spanning tree, so there at most $\vert S_i \vert - 1$ join two vertices in $S_i$ (In another word, the edges that linked two nodes in $S_i$ are count twice in $i \vert S_i \vert $.) Hence, there at least $i \vert S_i \vert - \vert S_i \vert - 1 = (i-1)\vert S_i \vert +1 $ distinct edges of $T^\*$ are incident on $S_i$.



b) after removing these edges, any edge connecting two different components are incident on $S_{i-1}$.

After removing all the edges in $T^\*$ incident on $S_i$, we will break $T^\*$ into several components. Now, we focus on the edges (in $G$) that connect two components (after removing above edges). 

**Case 1:** The edge incident to $S_i$, because $S_i \subseteq S_{i-1}$. Hence this kind of edges are also incident to $S_{i-1}$. 

**Case 2:** The edge is not incident to $S_i$, but we know it can connect two component. And the two components are created by removing the edges in $T^\*$ incident to $S_i$. So, there exists a node $u$ belonging to $S_i$ in one of the two components. So, this edge $e=\{s,t\}$ creates a cycle in $T^\*+e$, and the cycle includes node $u$. Because $T^\*$ is locally optimal, and $d_{T^\*}(u) \geq i \geq \Delta(T) - \ell + 1$, and we know the degree of $s,t$ cannot be both $ \leq i -2$, otherwise, their degree in $T^\*$ will must be $\leq d_{T^\*}(u)-2$ and we have can do local move for $u$ by $T^\*+e$  ($d_{T^\*}(u) \geq \Delta(T) - \ell$, we can pick up $u$ in **algorithm**) . Hence, one of endpoints in $e$ (w.l.g we denote as $s$) will have $d_{T^\*}(s) > i-2 $ i.e. $d_{T^*}(s) \geq i- 1$. Thus, we get $s \in S_{i-1}$. That means $e$ is incident on $S_{i-1}$. $\square$



**Claim 2:** $\exists i \geq \Delta(T) - l + 1$ s.t. $\vert S_{i-1} \vert \leq 2\vert S_i \vert$.



**Proof.** Suppose, for any $i\geq \Delta(T) - l + 1$, we have $\vert S_{i-1} \vert > 2\vert S_i \vert$. Let $i = \Delta(T) - l + 1$, we have
$$
\vert S_{\Delta(T) -\ell} \vert > 2 \vert S_{\Delta(T) -\ell+1} \vert \cdots 2^\ell \vert S_{\Delta(T)} \vert > 2^{\lceil \lg n \rceil} \vert S_{\Delta(T)} \vert > n \vert S_{\Delta(T)} \vert > n
$$

Note, here $\vert S_{\Delta(T)}\vert \geq 1$, otherwise, it cannot be a spanning tree. The above conclusion contradicts to the fact that there are $n$ vertices in the graph $G$. $\square$

### Review the idea of proof for approx ratio

The **algorithm** starts with an arbitrary spanning tree $T$ and using $\Delta(T)$ as parameter to conduct the local search, and terminates resulting in $T^\*$. We define a series set $S_i$ (where $i$ relates to $\Delta(T)$), and we prove that if we moving all the edges (denote as $E_i$) in $T^\*$ incident $S_i$, we find any edges that connect two components (generating by removing $E_i$) are incident to $S_{i-1}$, and we can lower bound (which relates to $\vert S_i \vert$) the size of $\vert E_i \vert $ . By claim 2, we can find a specific $i-1$, and consider this specific set $S_{i-1}$, that can have a upper bound (relates to size of $\vert S_i\vert$). Through the relation between average degree in $T^\*$ of $S_{i-1}$ and $OPT$, we can get the lower bound of $OPT$ is $(\Delta(T)-\ell) /2$, which will not less than $(\Delta(T^\*)-\ell) /2$.



## Running time analysis


Then, let's analysis the running time. In this proof, we will learn the strategy of potential function. 

**Theorem:** The algorithm finds a locally optimal tree polynomial time.
For tree $T$ define the potential function $\phi(T) = \sum_{v \in V} 3^{d_T(v)}$. 

  - Initially: $\phi(T) \leq n^3\Delta(T) \leq n3^n$
  
  - Lowest: for Hamiltonian path: potential is $2\cdot3 + (n - 2)3^2 > n$

**Claim 1:** At each step potential function drops by $\left( 1 - \frac{2}{27n^3} \right)$.

Then, we know after $\frac{27}{2} n^4 \ln 3$ local moves the potential function is:

$$
\left(1 - \frac{2}{27n^3}\right)^{\frac{27}{2} n^4 \ln 3} \cdot (n3^n)\leq e^{-n \ln 3} \cdot (n3^n) = n
$$

As lower bound of potential function of spanning tree is $n$, so after $O(n^4)$ moves no local move possible and we must terminates the algorithm. $\square$



Now, I will show the decrease ration mentioned in **claim 1**.



**Claim 1:** At each step potential function drops by $\left( 1 - \frac{2}{27n^3} \right)$.



**Proof.** Denote the current spanning tree is $T'$. Suppose the algorithm reduces the degree of a vertex $u$ from $i$ to $i - 1$, where $i \geq \Delta(T) - \ell$, and adds an edge $(v, w)$. We know the degree of $v,w$ at most $i-2$ before local move. And we know the function $f(x) = 3^x - 3^{x-1} = 2 \cdot 3^{x-1} $ is a monotonically increasing. 

Then the increase in the potential function due to increasing the degree of $v$ and $w$ is at most $2 \cdot (3^{i-1} - 3^{i-2}) = 4 \cdot 3^{i-2}$. The decrease in the potential function due to decreasing the degree of $u$ is $3^i - 3^{i-1} = 2 \cdot 3^{i-1}$. And we have

$$
3^\ell = 3^{\lceil \log_2 n\rceil} \leq 3 \cdot 3^{\log_2 n} \leq 3 \cdot 2^{2\log_2 n} = 3n^2
$$

Therefore, the overall decrease in the potential function is at least

$$
\begin{aligned}
2 \cdot 3^{i-1} - 4 \cdot 3^{i-2} &= 2 \cdot 3^{i} \geq 2 \cdot 3^{\Delta(T) - \ell} \\
&= \frac{2\cdot 3^{\Delta(T)}}{3^\ell}\\
& \geq \frac{2\cdot 3^{\Delta(T)}}{3n^2} \\
& = \frac{2\cdot n 3^{\Delta(T)}}{3n^3} \\
& \geq \frac{2\cdot n 3^{\Delta(T')}}{3n^3} \\
& \geq \frac{2\cdot \sum_{v\in V} 3^{d_{T'}(v)}}{27n^3} \\
& = \frac{2}{27n^3} \cdot \phi(T') \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus, for the resulting tree $T''$ we have that $\phi(T'') \leq \left( 1 - \frac{2}{27n^3} \right) \phi(T')$. $\square$

