---
layout: post
title: Randomized Algs:Randomized Min-Cut
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
categories: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

This blog, we still talk about randomized algorithms. Today we will focus on Randomized Min-Cut Algorithm.

<!--more-->

# Problem definition and Randomized Algorithm


**Min-Cut Problem:** Given a connected graph ${G = (V, E)}$, Our goal is to _find smallest ${C \subseteq E}$ that splits ${G}$._

${C}$ is called a min-cut, and we **define** ${\lambda(G) := \vert C\vert}$ is the edge connectivity of ${G}$.

Then, we give the pseudocode of Randomized Min-Cut Algorithm as below

{% highlight pseudocode linenos %}
function RandMinCut(V, E)
    while |V| > 2 do
        Pick e ∈ E uniformly at random.
        Contract e and remove self-loops.
    return E
{% endhighlight %}

Note: In this algorithm, we contract an edge in graph ${G}$ each time, and finally, we left two "nodes" in graph. In fact, the two nodes represent two components, and we return the edges between the two components as result.


# Analysis of Algorithm

**Observation 1**: RandMinCut${(G)}$ may return a cut of size greater than ${\lambda(G)}$.

**Observation 2**: A specific min-cut ${C}$ is returned, if and only if any of the edge from ${C}$ isn't contracted. 



**Lemma**: ${G_i = (V_i, E_i)}$ with ${n_i = n - i}$ vertices, we have ${\lambda(G_i) \geq \vert C \vert}$.  

**Proof.** We will show following statement to prove this lemma

Given a graph ${G=(V,E)}$, we contract an edge ${e=\{u,v\}}$ and get graph ${G/e}$. Then we have ${\lambda(G/e) \geq \lambda(G)}$.

We denote ${G/e=(V',E')}$, and 

$$
V'=V\cup \{w\}\setminus\{u,v\}
$$

$$
E'=E\cup \left\{\{w,t\} \mid \{v,t\} \{u,t\} \in E\right\} \setminus N(v) \setminus N(u)
$$

Suppose ${\lambda(G/e) < \lambda(G)}$, we denote the minimum cut of ${G/e}$ is ${C'}$.

* Case 1: ${N(w) \cap C' = \emptyset}$, that means vertex ${w}$ is not incident to any edge in ${C'}$. Hence, let ${C=C'}$, we know ${C}$ is also a cut of ${G}$. We have ${\vert C \vert = \vert C' \vert = \lambda(G/e)}< \lambda(G)$, which contradicts to the definition of ${\lambda(G)}$. 
* Case 2: ${N(w) \cap C' \neq \emptyset}$, that means vertex ${w}$ is incident to some edge ${e = \\{w,t\\} \in C'}$.  If we replace the edges in ${C'}$ like ${\\{w,t\\}}$ as original edges ${\\{v,t\\} }$ or ${\\{u,t\\}}$ and construct ${C \subseteq E}$. We have ${\vert C \vert = \vert C' \vert = \lambda(G/e)}< \lambda(G)$, which contradicts to the definition of ${\lambda(G)}$. ${}$

By, this statement we have
$$
\vert C \vert = \lambda(G_0) \leq \lambda(G_1) \leq \cdots \leq \lambda(G_i)
$$
Hence, we prove the lemma. ${\square}$



**Theorem**: For any min-cut ${C}$, the probability that RandMinCut${(G)}$ returns ${C}$ is ${\geq \frac{2}{n(n-1)}}$.

**Proof**. Let ${e_1,\cdots,e_{n-2}}$ be the contracted edges, ${G_0 = G}$ and ${G_i = G_{i-1} / e_i}$. We define event ${\mathcal{E}\_i := [e_i \not\in C]}$.   $C$ is returned iff ${\mathcal{E}\_1 \cap \ldots \cap \mathcal{E}\_{n-2}}$. 

Now, we need compute the Conditional Probabilities 

Given events ${\mathcal{E}\_1, \mathcal{E}\_2}$, the _conditional probability_ of ${\mathcal{E}_2}$ given ${\mathcal{E}_1}$ is defined as 

$$
Pr[\mathcal{E}_2|\mathcal{E}_1] = \frac{Pr[\mathcal{E}_1 \cap \mathcal{E}_2]}{Pr[\mathcal{E}_1]}
$$

Then we have that 
$$
Pr[\mathcal{E}_1 \cap \mathcal{E}_2] = Pr[\mathcal{E}_1] \cdot Pr[\mathcal{E}_2|\mathcal{E}_1]
$$

By induction, for events ${\mathcal{E}_1, \ldots, \mathcal{E}_k}$, we have

$$
Pr\left[\bigcap_{i=1}^k \mathcal{E}_i\right] = Pr[\mathcal{E}_1] \cdot Pr[\mathcal{E}_2|\mathcal{E}_1] \cdots Pr\left[\mathcal{E}_k \Bigg| \bigcap_{i=1}^{k-1} \mathcal{E}_i\right]
$$

Hence, we have the probability that ${C}$ is returned

$$
\begin{aligned}
Pr[C \text{ returned}] &= Pr[\mathcal{E}_1 \cap \ldots \cap \mathcal{E}_{n-2}] \\
&= Pr[\mathcal{E}_1] \cdot Pr[\mathcal{E}_2|\mathcal{E}_1] \cdot \ldots \cdot Pr[\mathcal{E}_{n-2}|\mathcal{E}_1 \cap \ldots \cap \mathcal{E}_{n-3}] \\
&= \prod_{i=1}^{n-2} p_i 
\end{aligned}
$$

where ${p_i = Pr[\mathcal{E}\_i \mid \mathcal{E}\_1 \cap \cdots \cap \mathcal{E}\_{i-1}] }$.

By lemma, we have ${\lambda(G_i)\geq \vert C \vert}$. So ${\vert E_i \vert = \frac{1}{2}\sum_{v \in V_i} d(v) \geq \frac{n_i}{2}\lambda(G_i) \geq  \frac{n_i}{2}\vert C\vert}$ (Otherwise for some ${v \in V_i, d(v) \leq \lambda(G_i)}$, we can pick up all the edges that are incident to vertex ${v}$ as a cut that is smaller than min-cut).

Then, we have (denote the ${n_i:= \vert V_i \vert = n-i}$, and we also use the assumption that no edge from $C$ has been contracted yet.)

$$
\begin{aligned}
1 - p_i &= Pr[\text{select }e \in E_{i-1} \text{ in } C \big| \cap^{i-1}_{j=1}\mathcal{E}] \\
&= \frac{|C|}{|E_{i-1}|} \\
&\leq \frac{|C|}{\frac{1}{2}n_{i-1}|C|} \\
&= \frac{2}{n - (i - 1)} = \frac{2}{n + 1 - i} 
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus, we have

$$
p_i \geq 1 - \frac{2}{n + 1 - i} = \frac{n - 1 - i}{n + 1 - i}
$$

$$
\require{cancel}
\begin{aligned}
Pr[C \text{ returned}] &= \prod_{i=1}^{n-2} p_i \quad \text{where } p_i = Pr[\mathcal{E}_i | \mathcal{E}_1 \cap \ldots \cap \mathcal{E}_{i-1}] \\
&\geq \prod_{i=1}^{n-2} \frac{n - 1 - i}{n + 1 - i} \\
&= \frac{\bcancel{n - 2}}{n} \cdot \frac{\bcancel{n - 3}}{n - 1} \cdot \frac{\bcancel{n - 4}}{\bcancel{n - 2}} \cdot \cdots \frac{\bcancel{3}}{\bcancel{5}} \cdot \frac{2}{\bcancel{4}} \cdot \frac{1}{\bcancel{3}} \\
&= \frac{2}{n(n - 1)}
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, we prove ${Pr[C \text{ returned}]\geq \frac{2}{n(n - 1)} }$. ${\square}$

# Repeat makes better

Actually, the above probability is not a good result, but we can repeatedly call RandMinCut${(G)}$ to get better result and return the smallest cut. If we call it ${t\frac{n(n-1)}{2}}$ times, we have
$$
\begin{aligned}
\Pr[\text{not a min-cut}] &\leq \left(1 - \frac{2}{n(n - 1)}\right)^{t\frac{n(n-1)}{2}} \\
&\leq \left(e^{-\frac{2}{n(n-1)}}\right)^{t\frac{n(n-1)}{2}} \\
&= e^{-t}
\end{aligned}
$$

(This uses that $1 + x \leq e^x$ for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$.)

# Las Vegas vs Monte Carlo

What is the main difference between RandQS and RandMinCut?

Actually, they represents different strategies in randomized algorithm.  That are --

**Las Vegas:**
- Always returns correct answer.
- Number of steps used is a random variable. (The expectation of running time is polynomial. )

**Monte Carlo:**
- Some probability of error. (The probability of failure is small.)
- Number of steps used is determined.
