---
layout: article
title: NP, NP-Complete Problems
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
---

Thsi blog is still talking about hardness of problems, focusing on NP, NP-Complete Problems.

<!--more-->

# Definition of NP

## Problems and Algorithms

The input to a computational problem will be encoded as a finite binary
string ${ s }$. We denote the length of a string ${ s }$ by ${ \vert s \vert }$. 

We will identify <b>a decision problem X with the set of strings on which the answer is “yes.”</b> An algorithm ${ A }$ for a decision problem receives an input string ${ s }$ and <b>returns the value “yes” or “no”</b> — we will denote this returned value by ${ A(s) }$. We say that ${ A }$ solves the problem ${ X }$ if for all strings ${ s }$, we have ${ A(s) = yes }$ if and only if ${ s \in X }$.

we say that ${ A }$ has a <b>polynomial running time</b> if there is a
polynomial function ${ p(\cdot) }$ so that for every input string ${ s }$, the algorithm ${ A }$ terminates on ${ s }$ in at most ${ O(p(\vert s \vert)) }$ steps.

## Efficient Certification

A "checking algorithm" for a problem ${ X }$ has a different structure, we need input string ${ s }$ and a separate "<b>certificate</b>" string ${ t }$ that contains the evidence that ${ s }$ is a "<b>yes</b>" instance of ${ X }$.

Thus we say that ${ C }$ is an <b>efficient certifier</b> for a problem ${ X }$ if 

* ${ C }$ is a polynimial-time algorithm that takes two input arguments ${ s }$ and ${ t }$.

* We have ${ s \in X }$ if and only if there exists a string ${ t }$ such that ${ \vert t \vert \leq poly(\vert s \vert) }$ and ${ C(s,t) = yes }$

It's toooooo abstract definition! Let's give an example to try to understand it.

For Independent Set Problem ${ X }$ (here ${ X }$ is the set of all the yes instances in decision IS problem). We may hard to know instance ${ (G,k)\in X }$ is "yes" or "no"), but here we use the Certification way to do it. Let's give a concerate vertex set ${ S \in G }$ with at least ${ k }$ vertices, actully this set ${ S }$ is a "certificate" string ${ t }$. And the algorithm ${ C }$ is to check whether this set ${ S }$ is a independent set (check whether there have edges in ${ S }$). So, ${ C(s,t)= yes, s = (G,k) }$ iff ${ s \in X }$. That's clear, if ${ S }$ is indeed a independent set of ${ G }$ with at least ${ k }$ vertices, it's no doubt ${ s=(G,k) }$ is a yes instance.


## Definition of NP

* <b>P</b> Problem: decision problems with polytime algortihm.

* <b>NP</b> Problem: decision problems with polytime certifier (efficient certifier).

* <b>EXP</b> Problem: decision problems with exponential time algorithm.

<b>Claim 1</b> ${ P \subseteq NP }$

Proof. Consider a problem ${ X \in P }$, that means there exists a polynomial algorithm ${ A}$, that can solving the problem ${ X }$. That is ${ \forall s \in X }$, ${ A(s) = yes }$. Hence, for the certifier, we can set ${ t = \emptyset }$, and ${ C(t,s) = A(s) }$, it's easy to check ${ C(t,s) =yes }$ iff ${ A(s) =yes }$. So ${ X \in NP }$, that means ${ P \subseteq NP }$. ${ \square }$

<b>Claim 2</b> ${ NP \subseteq EXP }$

Proof. ${\forall X \subseteq NP  }$, By definition, ${ \forall s \in X }$, ${ \exists }$ a polytime certifier ${ C(s,t) }$ with the size of ${ t }$ is poly ${ poly(\vert s \vert }$. To solve ${ s }$, we can run ${ C(s,t) }$ for all possible certificate ${ t }$. So there exists ${ exp(\vert x\vert) }$ choices for ${ t }$. And we can return yes if there exists ${ t }$ such that ${ C(s,t) }$. Otherwise, ${ s }$ is a no instance. Hence, ${ X \in EXP }$. ${ \square }$.

# Defnition of NP-Complete

<b>Definition of NP-Complete</b> A problem ${ X}$ is NPC if

1. ${ X \in NP }$
2. ${ \forall Y \in NP }$, ${ Y\leq_p X }$

<b>Claim 3</b> Let ${ X }$ be an NPC problem, then ${ X \in P }$ iff ${ P = NP }$.

Proof. If ${ P = NP }$, ${ X \in P }$

If ${ X \in P }$, and ${ \forall Y \in NP, Y \leq_p X}$, so ${ Y \in P }$. Hence, ${ NP \subseteq P }$, that means ${ NP = P }$ because ${ P \subseteq NP }$. ${ \square }$

## Strategy to prove NPC

Let ${ X }$ be an already-known NPC Problem. Now to show ${ Y }$ is NPC

1. ${ Y \in NP }$

2. ${ X \leq_p Y }$. 

By transitivity we can prove any NP problem can reduce to ${ Y }$. Now, we need to prove first NPC problem!!

## First NPC problem -- CKT-SAT

### Definition of Circuit Satisfiability

Circuit Satisfiability (CKT-SAT): Given a circuit ${ K }$, directed acyclic graph (directed tree) with boolean gates ${ \land, \lor,\lnot }$ as nodes as below

1. The <b>sources</b> (the bottom leaves with no incoming edges) in ${ K }$ are labeled either with one of the constants ${ 0 }$ or ${ 1 }$, or with the name of distinct variable. The nodes with variables will become the <b>inputs</b> to ${ K }$.

2. Every other node is labeled with one of the Boolean operators. Nodes with ${ \land, \lor }$ have two incomming edge and nodes with ${ \lnot }$ have one incoming edge.

3. The root node (the only one node with no outgoing edges) will represent the <b>output</b>. 

So the Circuit Satisfiability (CKT-SAT) problem is, given a circuit ${ K }$, does there exists any input assignment so that output is ${ 1 }$.

### CKT-SAT is NPC

Proof. 

1. Show ${CKT-SAT \in NPC}$. 

The certificate ${ t }$ can be the assignment of each inputs. And the certifier ${ C(K,t), K\in CKT-SAT }$ is the algorithm to compute the output of circuit ${ K }$, which is polynomial. So ${CKT-SAT \in NPC}$.

2. Show ${ \forall X \in NP }$, ${ X \leq_p CKT-SAT}$.

As ${ X \in NP }$, it has a polynomial certifier ${ C(x,t), x \in X }$ such that ${ t \leq poly(\vert x \vert) }$. Hence, if we want  to solve ${ X }$, we equivalently transfer it to another problem: "is there exists a ${ t }$ such that ${ t \leq poly(\vert x \vert) }$ so that ${ C(x,t) = yes }$?"

We will transfer this problem to CKT-SAT, that means if we can solve CKT-SAT, we can solve ${ X }$. Following is the construction. Because, certifier ${ C }$ indeed exists, we can transfer it to a computer, which consists of real circuits. We can take instance ${ x }$ as constants (given value) in leaves and certificate ${ t }$ as variables (input). It's clear this CKT-SAT problem have an assignment that output ${ 1 }$ iff ${ C(x,t) =yes }$. ${ \square }$

## Using Stratgy

### 3-SAT ${ \leq_p }$ CKT-SAT

Proof.

1. 3-SAT ${ \in NP }$. We can take a satisfiable assignment ${ t }$ as certifier, and the algorithm check whether input is satisfiable is a polynomial certifier. 

2. CKT-SAT ${ \leq_p }$ 3-SAT

For any instance ${ K\in }$ CKT-SAT, we will construct a 3-SAT instance by it as follow.

(a) For each edge in the circuit ${ K }$, creat a SAT variable ${ x_i }$.

(b) For each node ${ v }$ labeled with ${ \lnot }$, suppose the incoming edge is ${ u }$, we need to guarantee ${ x_v = \overline{x_u} }$. We can use two clauses ${ (x_v \lor x_u) }$ and ${ (\overline{x_v} \lor \overline{x_u}) }$ to replace.
<details><summary>Showing the equivalence.</summary>

${\Rightarrow}$: if ${ x_v = \overline{x_u} }$, it's easy to check ${ (x_v \lor x_u) = 1}$ and ${ (\overline{x_v} \lor \overline{x_u}) =1}$. 

${\Leftarrow}$: if ${ (x_v \lor x_u) =1}$ and ${ (\overline{x_v} \lor \overline{x_u}) = 1 }$, assume ${ x_v \neq \overline{x_u} }$, that means ${ x_v = x_u }$, so we cannot guarantee ${ (x_v \lor x_u) }$ and ${ (\overline{x_v} \lor \overline{x_u}) }$ is ${ 1 }$ at the same time.

</details>

### Graph color ${ \leq_p }$ 3-SAT