---
layout: post
title: Intro Appro Alg:Rounding and Dual rounding algorithm
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
categories: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

This blog will talking about the rounding algorithm of set cover problem.

<!--more-->

Given a Set Cover Problem, a set of elements ${ E=\\{e_1,\cdots,e_n\\} }$, and subsets ${ S_1,\cdots, S_m \subseteq E}$ and for each ${ S_j }$ associated weight ${ w_j }$. We hope to find a set cover ${ I }$ such that ${ \bigcup_{j\in I} S_j = E }$. The objective is minimizing ${ \sum_{j \in I} w_j }$.

# Deterministic Rounding Algorithm

We can still consider the ILP for set cover 

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
&\text{minimize} && Z = \sum_{j=1}^{m } w_j x_j \\
&\text{subject to} && \sum_{j \in \{j\mid e_i \in S_j\}} x_j \geq 1, \quad \forall e_i \in E\\
& && x_j \in \{0,1\}, \quad \forall j = 1,2,\cdots, m\\
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$</center>

Solve the relaxed LP Problem,

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
&\text{minimize} && Z = \sum_{j=1}^{m} w_j x_j \\
&\text{subject to} && \sum_{j \in \{j\mid e_i \in S_j\}} x_j \geq 1, \quad \forall e_i \in E\\
& && x_j \geq 0, \quad \forall j = 1,2,\cdots, m\\
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$</center>

Let each ${ e_i }$ element appears in at most ${ f }$ sets

Hence, we can get a similar algorithm ${ 1 }$:

Step 1: Solve the LP and get optimal solution ${ x\_1^\*, x\_2^\*,\cdots,  x\_m^\*}$ with value ${ Z\_{LP}^\* }$

Step 2: Add ${ j }$ to solution ${ I }$ if ${ x\_j^\* \geq 1/f}$

<b>Theorem:</b> Algorithm ${ 1 }$ ${ f }$-approximates the optimal set cover

1. Polynomial Run-time: LP can be solved in polynomial time and rounding in step 2 can be finished in linear time.

2. Feasibility: ${ \sum_{j \in \\{j\mid e_i \in S_j\\}} x\_j^\* \geq 1 }$, so at least some ${ x\_j^\* \geq 1/f }$, hence ${ \sum_{j \in \\{j\mid e_i \in S_j\\}} \hat{x}_j \geq 1 }$. 

3. ${ f }$-approximation: for each ${ \hat{x_j} }$, if ${ x\_j^\* \geq 1/f }$, ${ \hat{x_j} = 1 }$, else ${ \hat{x_j} = 0 }$. And we know the minimum value of ILP ${ Z^\*\_{ILP} }$ will not less than the minimum value of LP ${ Z^\*\_{LP} }$ (because the feasible region of ILP is the subset of the feasible region of LP). Hence, we have

<center>$$
\vert I \vert = \sum_{j = 1}^n w_j \hat{x}_j \leq f \sum_{j=1}^n w_j x^*_j = f Z^*_{LP}\leq f Z^*_{ILP} = f OPT
$$</center>

Hence we prove that Algorithm ${ 1 }$ is a ${ f }$-approximation algorithm. ${ \square }$

# Dual Rounding Algorithm

We will try to consider the dual problem of set cover to get another approximation algorithm

* Charge each ${ e_i }$ a price ${ y_i \geq 0 }$ for its coverage by some set cover.

* And we need to make the total price of each ${ S_j }$ less that weight ${ w_j }$

* Find the highest total price can be charged to all elements.

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
&\text{maxmize} && Z = \sum_{i=1}^{n} y_i \\
&\text{subject to} && \sum_{i \in \{i\mid e_i \in S_j\}} y_i \leq w_j, \quad \forall j  = 1,2,\cdots, m \\
& && y_i \geq 0, \quad \forall i = 1,2,\cdots, n\\
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$</center>

In fact this is a dual problem of set cover LP relaxation. 

## Weak dual property

Let ${ y }$ be any feasible solution to dual problem and ${ x }$ be any feasible solution to primal problem.

Because ${\sum_{j \in \\{j\mid e_i \in S_j\\}} x_j \geq 1 }$, we have 

<center>$$
\sum_{i=1}^n y_i \leq \sum_{i=1}^n \left(y_i \sum_{j \in \{j\mid e_i \in S_j\}} x_j \right)
$$</center>

We can re-write the right-side, we can first iterately each subset 

<center>$$
\sum_{i=1}^n \left(y_i \sum_{j \in \{j\mid e_i \in S_j\}} x_j \right) = \sum_{j=1}^m \left(x_j \sum_{i \in \{i\mid e_i \in S_j\}} y_i \right)
$$</center>

Addtionally, ${ \sum_{i \in \{i\mid e_i \in S_j\}} y_i \leq w_j }$, hence, we have

<center>$$
\sum_{i=1}^n y_i \leq \sum_{j=1}^m \left(x_j \sum_{i \in \{i\mid e_i \in S_j\}} y_i \right) \leq \sum_{j=1}^m \left(x_j w_j \right)
$$</center>

hence, any feasible solution of dual problem is at most the minimum value of primal LP

<center>$$
\sum_{i=1}^n y_i \leq Z_{LP}^*
$$</center>

## Strong dual property

We don't prove here, we have optimal value of primal and dual problem is equal

<center>$$
\sum_{i=1}^n y^*_i = \sum_{j=1}^m x^*_j w_j
$$</center>

## Algorithm ${ 2 }$

Step 1: Solve the Dual LP, and get optimal solution ${ y\_1^\*, y\_2^\*,\cdots,  y\_n^\* }$ with value ${ Z\_D^\* }$

Step 2: Add ${ j }$ to solution ${ I }$ if the dual constraint for ${ S_j }$ is tight, that is ${ \sum_{i \in \\{i\mid e_i \in S_j\\}} y\_i^\* = w_j }$

## Algorithm ${ 2 }$ is ${ f }$-approximation algorithm

<b>Theorem</b> Algorithm ${ 2 }$ ${ f }$-approximates the optimal set cover

Proof.

1. Polynomial Run-time: The Dual LP can be solved in polynomial time and Step 2 takes linear time

2. Feasibility: Suppose element ${ e_i }$ is not covered. Hence, for all the ${ S_j }$ such that ${ e_i \in S_j }$, their corresponding dual constraints is not tight (otherwise, we will pick up it in Step 2). So, we can inrease ${ y\_i^\* }$ while keeping the solution still feasible. Which contradicts to ${ Z\_D^\* }$ is optimal value. 

3. ${ f }$-approximation: we pick ${ S_j, j\in I }$ because constraint is tight. So, we have ${ \sum_{j\in I} w_j = \sum_{j\in I} \sum_{i \in \\{i\mid e_i \in S_j\\}} y\_i^\* }$. Because, ${ e_i }$ appears at most in ${ f }$ subsets, so ${ \sum_{j\in I} w_j = \sum_{j\in I} \sum_{i \in \\{i\mid e_i \in S_j\\}} y\_i^\* \leq f \sum_{i =1}^n y\_i^\* = f Z\_D^\* = f Z\_{LP}^\* \leq f Z\_{ILP}^\* = f OPT }$

