---
layout: post
title: Gready Alg and Local Search:Single Macine Job Scheduling
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
categories: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

From this blog, we will talk about gready algorithm and local search in detail. And this blog will focus on the problem "scheduling jobs with deadlines on a single machine".

<!--more-->

# Statement of Problem

- Given $n$ jobs and a machine able to process one job at a time
- Each job is associated with the following parameters:
  1. Process time: $p_j$
  2. Release date: $r_j$
  3. Due date: $d_j$
- If we complete processing job $j$ at time $C_j$ the lateness is: $L_j = C_j - d_j$
- Objective: minimize the maximum lateness: $L_{\text{max}} = \max_{j=1,\ldots,n} L_j$.
- Only decide ${L_{max} \leq 0}$ is a **NP hard** Problem!!!

- $\rho$-approximate algorithm: if $OPT = 0$ algorithm must find solution with objective $\rho \cdot 0 = 0$, implies $P=NP$. Hence, there doesn't exist $\rho$-approximate algorithm unless $P=NP$.

- Hence, we have to consider the **special case**: assume all due dates $d_j$ are negative, implies optimal objective is positive.

# Greedy Algorithm and analysis

Greedy algorithm: At any moment when the machine is free start some job among all available jobs.



**Theorem:** The greedy algorithm is a 2-approximation for the scheduling problem.

**Proof.** 

1. Consider some **optimal schedule** and let maximum lateness: $L^\*_{\text{max}}$ and $C^*_{\text{max}} = \max_j C^\*_j$

2. As due dates $d_j$ are negative and $C^*_j$ are positive:
$$
L^*_{\text{max}} = \max_j(C^*_j - d_j) \geq \max_j C^*_j = C^*_{\text{max}}
$$

$$
L^*_{\text{max}} = \max_j(C^*_j - d_j) \geq \max_j(-d_j)
$$

3. Consider a schedule produced by **greedy algorithm** and let $L_{\text{max}}$ be maximum lateness and $C_{\text{max}} = \max_j C_j$.

4. As algorithm is greedy and the machine never sit idle if a job is waiting (don't have gap). That means $C\_{\text{max}} \leq C^\*\_{\text{max}}$ (We process all the jobs on a single machine, the total process time is fixed, greedy algorithm doesn't generate gap, which equals to total process time. So, ${C\_\text{max} \leq C^\*_{\text{max}}}$).
5. Hence, we have

$$
\begin{aligned}
L_{\text{max}} &= \max_j (C_j - d_j) \\
&\leq \max_j C_j + \max_j(-d_j) \\
&= C_\text{max} + \max_j{(-d_j)} \\
& \leq C^*_{\text{max}} + \max_j(-d_j)\\
& \leq 2L^*_{\text{max}} \quad (\text{By step 2})
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, we get greedy algorithm is a 2-approximation for the scheduling problem. $\square$

