---
layout: post
title: Max flow and Min Cut
tags: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
categories: Algorithm_Design_and_Analysis
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

The following lectures will talk about some algorithms on graphs. This blog is about Max flow and Min cut problem, and how can they transfer to each other.


<!--more-->

Considering directed graphs, we define following concepts

* <b>Capacity</b>: We define "capacity" on an edge, indicating the maximum load this edge can carry.

* <b>Source node</b>: Generates the traffic (only have leaving edge)

* <b>Sink node</b>: Absorbs the traffic (only have incoming edge)

# Min ${ s-t }$ Cut

Given 

* Digraph ${ G= (V,E) }$

* Source node ${ s }$, sink node ${ t }$

* Capacity function: ${ c:E \rightarrow \mathbb{Z},\forall e \in E, c(e) \in \mathbb{Z} }$

Now, we give the definition of <font color=red><b>"CUT"</b></font>

An ${ s-t }$ <b>cut</b> is a partition of the vertex set ${ V }$ into two sets ${ S,T }$ such that 

<center>$$
s \in S, t\in T
$$</center>

Then we give the definition of <font color=red><b>Capacity of  ${ s-t }$ Cut</b></font>.

<center>$$
Cap (S,T) = \sum_{e \in \delta^+(S)} c(e)
$$</center>

Here, we use ${ \delta(S) }$ denotes the edges with nodes in vertex set ${ S }$, and ${ \delta^+(S),\delta^-(S) }$ represent the edges leaving from /coming into vertex set ${ S }$.

So, the Min ${ s-t }$ Cut problem is finding the ${  s-t}$ cut with minimum capacity.

# Max ${ s-t }$ Flow 

An ${ s-t }$ flow is a function ${ f: E\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}}$ satisifying the following constraints:

1. ${ \forall e \in E, 0\leq f(e)\leq c(e) }$

2. ${ \forall v \in V\setminus \{s,t\}, \sum_{e\in \delta^-(v) f(e) = \sum_{e \in \delta^+(v)} f(e)} }$

Now, we can define the <b>value</b> of flow ${ f }$ as

<center>$$
val(f) = \sum_{e \in \delta^+(s)} f(e)
$$</center>

So, the Max ${ s-t }$ flow problem is finding the ${  s-t}$ flow with maximum value.

# Flow and Cut

* <b>Lemma 1</b>: Let ${ f }$ be a flow and ${ (S,T) }$ be any ${ s-t }$ cut. Then the net flow accross the ${ (S,T) }$ cut is equal to the value of flow.

Proof. Because the flow ${ f }$ in each vetex satisfy the second rule, we have

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
val(f) &= \sum_{e\in \delta^+(s)} f(e) - \sum_{e\in \delta^-(s)} f(e), \text{ here }\delta^-(s) = \emptyset \\
&= \sum_{v\in S} \left( \sum_{e\in \delta^+(v)} f(e) - \sum_{e\in \delta^-(v)} f(e) \right), \text{ use #2 rule} \\
&=\sum_{v\in S} \sum_{e\in \delta^+(v)} f(e) - \sum_{v\in S} \sum_{e\in \delta^-(v)} f(e) \\
& = \sum_{e\in \delta^+(S)} f(e) - \sum_{e\in \delta^-(S)} f(e), \text{all the edges in S are canceled} \\
& =  Cap(S,T)
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$</center>

* <b>Lemma 2</b>: Let ${ f }$ be any flow ${ f }$ and let ${ (S,T) }$ be any ${ s-t }$ cut. Then the value of flow is at most the capacity of the ${ (S,T) }$ cut, that is 

<center>$$
val(f) \leq Cap(S,t)
$$</center>

Proof. By Lemma 1,

<center>$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
val(f) &= \sum_{e\in \delta^+(S)} f(e) - \sum_{e\in \delta^-(S)} f(e), \text{ By Lemma 1 }\\
& \leq \sum_{e\in \delta^+(S)} f(e) \\
& \leq \sum_{e\in \delta^+(S)} f(e), \text{ use #1 rule} \\
&= Cap(S,T)
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$</center>

* <b>Lemma 3</b>: Let ${ f }$ be any flow and ${ (S,T) }$ be any ${ s-t }$ cut. If ${ val(f) =  Cap(S,T) }$, ${ f }$ is a maximum flow and ${ (S,T) }$ is a min cut.

Proof. We assume the conclusion is not correct to deduce contradiction

1. ${ (S,T) }$ is not a min cut, let ${ (S',T') }$ be the min cut, so

<center>$$
Cap(S',T') < Cap(S,T) = val(f)
$$</center>

which contradicts to Lemma 2. All the value of flow can not greater than the capacity of cut.

2. flow ${ f }$ is not a maximum flow, let ${ f' }$ be the maximum flow

<center>$$
val(f') > val(f) = Cap(S,T)
$$</center>

which contradicts to Lemma 2.

# Max Flow-Min Cut Thorem

<font color=red><b>Max Flow-Min Cut Thorem</b></font>: In any network the value of max flow equals the capacity of the min cut. 

In the following part, we will give a way to transform the max-flow as a cut. By Lemma 3, we will prove the Thorem.