---
layout: article
title: Linear-time Sorting: Lower Bounds, Counting Sort, Radix Sort
tags: Introduction_to_Algorithms
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: Introduction_to_Algorithms
---

In this lecture, we still talk about sorting and we want to ask <b>"How fast can we sort?"</b>. Let's review the running time of previous learned Algorithms, the Heapsort and Merge Sort can achieve ${ O(n \lg n) }$ in the worst case. Randomized Quicksort can run in ${ O(n \lg n) }$ time on average. And Insetion Sort is ${ O(n^2) }$. All these Algortihms run no faster than ${ O(n \lg n) }$. 

<b>So can we do better?</b>

<!--more-->

<b>No but Yes!</b>. In fact, it depends on what kinds of manipulation are allowed. The Algorithms mentioned before have a common property: <i>the sorted order they determine is based only on <b>comparisons</b> between the input elements</i>. So, such sorting algorithms are called <b>comparison sort</b>. In this sense, the Anwser is <b>No</b>! We gonna prove that any comparison sort cannot run faster than ${ O(n \lg n) }$ in the worst case. 

From another way, if we use other oprations more than "<b>Comparison</b>", we can get some sorting algorithms faster than ${ O(n \lg n) }$. In this lecture, we will introduce <b>Counting sort</b> and <b>Radix sort</b>.

# Lower bounds for Comparison sorts

In a compasison sort, we can only use comparisons to gain the order information about input sequence ${ \left< a_1,a_2,\cdots, a_n \right> }$. In this section, we assume the all elements in array are distinct. Here we introduce <b>decision tree</b>. 

## Decision tree model

We can view the comparison sorts in terms of decision tree. A <b><i>decision tree</i></b> is a full binary tree that represents the comparsion between elements that are performed by a particular sorting algorithm operating on an input of a given size. In another words, for a given size of input, we can use decision tree to represent the algorithm, in which we only record each comparison in node, and the different result will lead to different child nodes. 

## Lower bounds


# Counting sort

# Radix sort