---
layout: article
title: Lecture 12:Existence of extreme points
tags: Linear_Programming
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: Linear_Programming
---

This blog is talking about the <b>when</b> there exists <b>extreme points</b>. The key idea of solving LP problem is optimal solution will be at basic feasible solution. But, some polyhedron have no extreme point. This blog will introduce how to tell a polyhedron processes at least one extreme point.

<!--more--> 

<b>Definition</b>: A polyhedron ${ P \subset \mathbb{R}^n }$ <b>contains a line</b> if there exists a vector ${ \bar{x} \in P }$ and a nonzero vector ${ \bar{d} \in \mathbb{R}^n }$ such that ${ \bar{x} + \lambda \bar{d} \in P }$ for all scalars ${ \lambda \in \mathbb{R} }$.

<b>Theorem</b>: For a **nonempty polyhedron** ${ P = \\{ \bar{x} \in \mathbb{R}^n \mid \bar{a}^\top \bar{x} \geq \bar{b}, i=1,2,\cdots,m \\} }$, the following assertions are equivalent:

1. ${ P }$ has at least one extreme point.

2. ${ P }$ contains no line.

3. ${ \text{span } \\{ \bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, \cdots, \bar{a}_m \\} = \mathbb{R}^n }$ (In other words, one can find $n$ linear independent vectors in the family ${\\{ \bar{a}_1,\bar{a}_2,\cdots,\bar{a}_m\\}}$).

**Proof.**

* (2) $\Rightarrow$ (1) 

Now, we know $P$ does not contain a line. Since $P$ is not empty, we can pick a point $\bar{p} \in P$. Let ${I_{\bar{p}} = \\{ i \mid \bar{a}\_i^{\top} \bar{p} \geq b_i \\}}$ be the set of indices of constraints active at $\bar{p}$. Since $\bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, ..., \bar{a}_m \in \mathbb{R}^n$, we have ${\text{dim span}\\{\bar{a}_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}}\\} \leq n}$. If $\text{dim span}\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}}\} = n$, then $\bar{p}$ is, by definition, a basic feasible solution and hence an extreme point of $P$.

On the other hand, if ${\text{dim span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I_{\bar{p}}\\} < n}$, then ${\text{span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I_{\bar{p}}\\}}$ is a proper subspace of $\mathbb{R}^n$ and we can choose a nonzero vector $\bar{d}$ orthogonal to ${\text{span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}}\\}}$. Consider the line consisting of all points of the form $\bar{y} = \bar{p} + \lambda \bar{d}$ for all $\lambda \in \mathbb{R}$. For all $i \in I_{\bar{p}}$, we have 

$$
\bar{a}_i^{\top}\bar{y} = \bar{a}_i^{\top}(\bar{p} + \lambda \bar{d}) = \bar{a}_i^{\top}\bar{p} + \lambda \bar{a}_i^{\top}\bar{d} = \bar{a}_i^{\top}\bar{p} = b_i
$$

Thus those constraints that were active at $\bar{p}$ remain active at all points on the line. However, since the polyhedron $P$ contains no lines, as we vary $\lambda$, some constraint $\bar{a}\_j^{\top}\bar{y} \geq b_j$ with $j \not\in I\_{\bar{p}}$ will eventually be violated.

At the point where that constraint is about to be violated, that constraint will become active.
Thus there exists some $\lambda^\* \in \mathbb{R}$ and some $j \not\in I_{\bar{p}}$ such that

$$
\bar{a}_j^{\top}(\bar{p} + \lambda^* \bar{d}) = b_j
$$

Note that $I_{\bar{p}} \subsetneq I_{\bar{p}+\lambda^\*\bar{d}}$ and $j \in I_{\bar{p}+\lambda^\*\bar{d}} \setminus I_{\bar{p}}$. Thus, we have

$$
\bar{a}_j^{\top} \bar{p} \neq b_j \text{ (because } j \not\in I_{\bar{p}})
$$

$$
\bar{a}_j^{\top}(\bar{p} + \lambda^* \bar{d}) = b_j
$$


The above two formulae imply that $\bar{a}\_j^\top \bar{d} \neq 0$. And, we have ${\bar{d} \in (\text{span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}}\\})^\perp \iff \bar{a}\_i^{\top} \bar{d} = 0}$ for all $i \in I_{\bar{p}}$. Hence, we know $\bar{a}\_j$ is **not** a linear combination of $\bar{a}_i, i\in I\_{\bar{p}}$, that is ${\bar{a}\_j \notin \text{span} \\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}}\\}}$.

Thus, by moving from $\bar{p}$ to $\bar{p} + \lambda^* \bar{d}$, the number of linearly independent active constraints has been increased by (at least) one.

**Case 1:** If ${\text{dim span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}+\lambda^\*\bar{d}}\\} = n}$, then $\bar{p} + \lambda^\* \bar{d}$ is an extreme point of the polyhedron $P$.

**Case 2:** If not, then ${\text{dim span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{\bar{p}+\lambda^\*\bar{d}}\\} < n}$ and we can repeat the same argument starting from $\bar{q} = \bar{p} + \lambda^\* \bar{d}$ rather than $\bar{p}$.

By repeating the same argument as many times as needed, we eventually end up with a point at which there are $n$ linearly independent active constraints. Such a point is, by definition, a basic solution; it is also **basic feasible solution** since we always stay within the feasible set. Then, we have found an **extreme point** by [theorem](https://wu-haonan.github.io/2023/09/11/LP_Lec_9.html#equivalence-of-three-characterizations) of the polyhedron!

* (1) $\Rightarrow$ (3)

We know $x_0$ is an extreme point of $P$, then by [theorem](https://wu-haonan.github.io/2023/09/11/LP_Lec_9.html#equivalence-of-three-characterizations) $x_0$ is a basic feasible solution of $P$. By definition, ${\text{dim span}\\{\bar{a}\_i \mid i \in I\_{x_0}\\} = n}$, which means we can find $n$ linearly independent vectors among the vectors $\bar{a}\_i,i \in I\_{x_0}$. So, we have

$$
\mathbb{R}^n = \text{span}\{\bar{a}_i \mid i \in I_{x_0}\} \subseteq \text{span}\{\bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, ..., \bar{a}_n\} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n
$$

Therefore, we have ${\text{span}\\{\bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, ..., \bar{a}_n\\} = \mathbb{R}^n}$.

* (3) $\Rightarrow$ (2)

Suppose $P$ contains a line ${\\{\bar{p}+\lambda \bar{d} \mid \lambda \in \mathbb{R} \\}}$ (with $\bar{d} \neq \bar{0}$). Since $\bar{p} + \lambda \bar{d} \in P, \forall \lambda \in \mathbb{R}$, we have

$$
\bar{a}_i^{\top} (\bar{p} + \lambda \bar{d}) \geq b_i, \forall \lambda \in \mathbb{R}, \forall i \in \{1,2,...,m\}
$$

$$
(\bar{a}_i^{\top} \bar{p} - b_i) + \bar{a}_i^{\top} \bar{d} \cdot \lambda \geq 0, \forall \lambda \in \mathbb{R}, \forall i \in \{1,2,...,m\}
$$

We know $(\bar{a}_i^{\top} \bar{p} - b_i), \bar{a}_i^{\top} \bar{d}$ are both constants, so if $f(\lambda) \geq 0, \forall \lambda \in \mathbb{R}$, that implies ${\bar{a}_i^{\top} \bar{d} = 0, \forall i \in \\{1,2,...,m\\}}$. Thus, we have ${\bar{d} \in (\text{span}\\{\bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, ..., \bar{a}_n\\})^\perp, \bar{d} \neq \{0\} }$. Therefore, ${\text{span}\\{\bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, ..., \bar{a}_n\\}}$ is a proper subspace of $\mathbb{R}^n$, which contradicts to ${ \text{span } \\{ \bar{a}_1, \bar{a}_2, \cdots, \bar{a}_m \\} = \mathbb{R}^n }$.  $\square$



<b>Corollary</b>: 

(1) Every nonempty bounded polyhedron has at least one basic feasible solution / extreme point.

(2) Every nonempty polyhedron in standard form has at least one basic feasible solution / extreme point. (Because polyhedron in standard form contains no line.)

**Proof**. Bounded polyhedron $P$ implies containing no line. Then by above theorem, we know $P$ has at least one basic feasible solution / extreme point. Similarly, we know polyhedron in standard form contains no line, which leads to that $P$ has at least one basic feasible solution / extreme point. $\square$