---
layout: article
title: Prerequisite:Logic and Number Theory
tags: Fundamental_Algorithm
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: Fundamental_Algorithm
---

In this series, I will introduce the Fundamental Contents in Computer Theory and Algorithms. If you hope to learn more advanced algorithms and techniques, please move to my another series [**Algorithm Design and Analysis**](https://wu-haonan.github.io/2023/08/21/ADA_Lec_1.html). 

In this blog, I try to do some preparation for following contents. I prefer to introduce the algorithms in a more rigorous and strict way. In theoretical computer science and algorithms, we will encounter lot of statements, like the correctness and running time for some specific algorithm. The way to assert a statement is true is **Proof**, then the statement will become a theorem (or lemma, claim, corollary anyway). Hence, we start from Logic which is very beginning of our story (may not be romantic but must be interesting and attractive).

Another part of this blog is number theory, which is powerful and common tool in our journey. Off course, we hope we can master more math, which are always the enrich toolbox for computer scientists. 

<!--more-->

# Logic

## Proposition

First, we will give the definition of **Proposition**. 

**Definition:** A **proposition** is a declarative sentence (that is, a sentence that declares a fact) that is either true or false, but not both. So we have **true proposition** and **false proposition**. 

**Definition:** The **truth value** of true proportion is true denote as $T$, and the **truth value** of false proportion is false denote as $F$.

We can denote proposition variables (or statement variables) by letters $p,q,r,s, \cdots$. The following step we will do is to combine some propositions together, that is **compound propositions**. 



**Definition:** Let $p$ be a proposition. The negation of $p$, denoted by $\lnot p$ (also denoted by $\bar{p}$). The truth value of the negation of $p,\lnot p$, is the opposite of the truth value of $p$.

**Definition:** Let $p$ and $q$ be propositions. The **conjunction** of p and q, denoted by $p \land q$, is the proposition "$p$ and $q$." The conjunction p ∧ q is true when both p and q are true and is false otherwise.

**Definition:** Let $p$ and $q$ be propositions. The **disjunction** of $p$ and $q$, denoted by $p \lor q$, is the proposition "$p$ or $q$." The disjunction $p \lor q$ is false when both p and q are false and is true otherwise. (Note disjunction is **inclusive or**, we will introduce **exclusive or** in the next.)

**Definition:** Let $p$ and $q$ be propositions. The **exclusive or** of $p$ and $q$, denoted by $p \oplus q$, is the proposition that is true when exactly one of $p$ and $q$ is true and is false otherwise. (We can also to represent it $(p\land \lnot p) \lor (\lnot p \land p)$ by above denotations).

## Conditional Statement

**Definition:** Let $p$ and $q$ be propositions. The **conditional statement** $p \rightarrow q$ is the proposition "if $p$, then $q$." The conditional statement $p \rightarrow q$ is **false** when $p$ is true and $q$ is **false**, and **true otherwise**. (Note: that means if $p$ is false, no matter what $p\rightarrow q$ is true) In the conditional statement $p \rightarrow q$, $p$ is called the hypothesis (or antecedent or premise) and $q$ is called the conclusion (or consequence).

The statement $p \rightarrow q$ is called a conditional statement because $p \rightarrow q$ asserts that $q$ is true on the condition that $p$ holds. A conditional statement is also called an **implication**.

## Converse, Contrapositive, and Inverse
Given a conditional statement $p \rightarrow q$, there are three related conditional statements that occur so often. 

**Converse:** The proposition $q \rightarrow p$ is called the converse of $p \rightarrow q$. 



**Contrapositive:** The contrapositive of $p \rightarrow q$ is the proposition $\lnot q \rightarrow \lnot p$. 



**Inverse:** The proposition $\lnot p \rightarrow \lnot q$ is called the inverse of $p \rightarrow q$.  



**Claim:** Only the contrapositive always has the same truth value as $p \rightarrow q$.

**Proof.** First we show that the contrapositive always has the same truth value as original conditional statement. If the contrapositive is false only when $\lnot p$ is false and $\lnot q$ is true, that is, only when $p$ is true and $q$ is false, which implies it has the same truth value with $p \rightarrow q$. $\square$

But the truth value of converse and inverse don't have relation to original conditional statement. 



When two compound propositions always have the same truth value we call them **equivalent**, so that a conditional statement and its contrapositive are equivalent.

## Biconditional

We now introduce another way to combine propositions that expresses that two propositions have the same truth value.

**Definition:** Let $p$ and $q$ be propositions. The biconditional statement $p \leftrightarrow q$ is the proposition "$p$ if and only if $q$." The biconditional statement $p \leftrightarrow q$ is true when $p$ and $q$ have the same truth values, and is false otherwise. Biconditional statements are also called **bi-implications**.

## Example

Let $p$, $q$, and $r$ be the propositions [^1]

$p$ : Grizzly bears have been seen in the area.

$q$ : Hiking is safe on the trail.

$r$ : Berries are ripe along the trail.

Write these propositions using $p$, $q$, and $r$ and logical connectives (including negations).

a) If berries are ripe along the trail, hiking is safe if and only if grizzly bears have not been seen in the area.

$r \rightarrow (q \rightarrow \lnot p)$

b) For hiking on the trail to be safe, it is necessary but not sufficient that berries not be ripe along the trail and for grizzly bears not to have been seen in the area.

$(q \rightarrow (\lnot r \land \lnot p)) \land (\lnot ((\lnot r \land \lnot p) \rightarrow q))$

f ) Hiking is not safe on the trail whenever grizzly bears have been seen in the area and berries are ripe along the trail.

$(p \land r) \rightarrow \lnot q$

# Number Theory

## Divisibility and Modular Arithmetic

**Definition:** Given $a$ and $b$ are integers with $a \neq 0$, if $\exists c \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $b = ac$, we say that $a$ **divides** $b$ or equivalently, $b/a$ is an integer. (Or $b$ is **divisible** by $a$).

**Definition:** When $a$ **divides** $b$, $a$ is a **factor** or **divisor** of $b$, and that $b$ is a **multiple** of $a$. The notation $a \mid b$ denotes that $a$ divides $b$. We write $a ∤ b$ when $a$ **does not divide** $a \nmid b$.

**Theorem:** Let $a, b$ and $c$ be integers, where $a \neq 0$. Then
(i) if $a \mid b$ and $a \mid c$, then $a \mid (b + c)$;
(ii) if $a \mid b$, then $a \mid bc$ for all integers $c$;
(iii) if $a \mid b$ and $b \mid c$, then $a \mid c$.

<details><summary>The proof is trivial, you can think a little bit and check mine.</summary>
Proof. <br>

(i) Because $a \mid b$ and $ a \mid c $, there exists $y, z \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $b = a y, c = a z $. Hence, we have integer $x = y + z$ such that $xa = ya + za = (b + c) $, that means $a \mid (b+c)$. <br>

(ii) Because $a \mid b$, there exists $z \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $b = a z$. Hence, we have integer $x = cz$ such that $xa =cza = bc $, that means $a \mid bc$. <br>

(iii) Because $a \mid b$ and $ b \mid c $, there exists $y, z \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $b = a y, c = b z $. Hence, we have integer $x = yz $ such that $xa = zya = bz  = c$, that means $a \mid c$. $\square$

</details>

### The Division Theorem

First, we will give the Division Theorem, it seems right and easy to understand. But its proof is complex than we thought. For preliminary,we will first give Well-Order Axiom, which is truth agreed by default, so we don't need and cannot prove it. (In fact, this is tooo complex and out of scope here, so we don't talk it here.)

**Well-Order Axiom:** every non-empty set of positive integers contains a **smallest** element (here "small" defined by Peano axioms).



**Theorem** <u>The Division Theorem</u>: Let $a$ be an integer and $d$ a positive integer. Then there are unique integers $q$ and $r$, with $0 \leq r < d$, such that $a = dq + r$.

**Proof.** Construct set ${S = \\{ x \in \mathbb{N} \mid x = a- kd, k\in \mathbb{Z}\\}}$. By definition, we know $S \subset \mathbb{N}$. Additionally, if $a \geq 0$, let $k=0$, we have $a \in S$, else $a < 0$, let $k=a$, we have $a-ad = a(1-d) \geq 0$, that implies $a-ad \in S$. So, we know $S$ is a non-empty set of positive integers. Hence, we can have a smallest element, say $r$. We know $r \geq 0$ and denote $r = a-q b, q \in \mathbb{Z}$. Now, we will prove the theorem in two part, existence and uniqueness.

**Existence:** We already find the $r$ such that $r \geq 0$, we just need to show $r <d$, that can prove the existence. Suppose $r \geq d$, let $r' = a - (q+1)d$, we have
$$
r' = a-(qa +1)d = a- q d - d = r - d \geq 0 \Rightarrow r' \in S
$$
And $r'<r$ which contradicts to $r$ is the smallest number. In the meantime, we find the integer $q$.

**Uniqueness:** Suppose we have $r_1,r_2,q_1,q_2$ such that $a = dq_1 + r_1, a = dq_2 + r_2$. With out loss generality, we set $r_1 \leq r_2$ Then, we have
$$
r_2 -r_1 = d (q_1 - q_2)
$$
We know $0 \leq r_1 \leq r_2 < d$, then we know $0 \leq r_2 - r_1 < d$. Because $q_1 - q_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$, then we have $q_1 = q_2$, and then force $r_2 - r_1 = 0$. $\square$



**Definition:** By above division theorem, $d$ is called the **divisor**, $a$ is called the **dividend**, $q$ is called the **quotient**, and $r$ is called the **remainder**. This notation is used to express the quotient and remainder:

$$
q = a \text{ div } d, \quad r = a \text{ mod } d
$$

**Theorem:** Given $a$ is an integer and $d$ is a positive integer, then $a \text{ div } d = \lfloor a/d \rfloor$ and $a \text{ mod } d = a − d \lfloor a/d \rfloor$.

<details><summary> The proof is easy, you can think about it and check my idea. </summary>
<b>Proof.</b> Because $(a/d -1) < \lfloor a/d \rfloor \leq a /d$, we have $0 \leq a - d \lfloor a/d \rfloor < d$. Let $r= a − d \lfloor a/d \rfloor$ and $q = \lfloor a/d \rfloor$, we know $a = qd + r$ such that $ 0\leq r < d$. We know such $q,r$ are unique, so they are quotient and reminder. $\square$
</details>


### Modular Arithmetic

**Definition:** If $a$ and $b$ are integers and $m$ is a positive integer, then $a$ is **congruent** to $b$ **modulo** $m$ if $m$ divides $a − b$. We use the notation $a \equiv b (\text{mod } m)$ to indicate that $a$ is congruent to $b$ modulo $m$. We say that $a \equiv b (\text{mod } m)$ is a congruence and that $m$ is its **modulus** (plural **moduli**). If $a$ and $b$ are not **congruent** modulo $m$, we write $a \not\equiv b (\text{mod } m)$.



**Theorem:** Let $a$ and $b$ be integers, and let $m$ be a positive integer. Then $a \equiv b (\text{mod } m)$ if and only if $a \text{ mod } m = b \text{ mod } m$.

**Proof.** 

$\Rightarrow$: Assume $a \equiv b (\text{mod } m)$, that means $m$ divides $a-b$ or $\exists z \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $a -b = mz$. Denote $r_1,r_2,q_1,q_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $a = q_1 m + r_1, b = q_2 m + r_2$ with $0\leq r_1,r_2 < m$. Hence, we have

$$
a -b = mz = (q_1-q_2)m + (r_1-r_2)
$$

Denote $t = z - q_1 + q_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$. So $mt = r_1 -r_2$, and $- m < r_1 -r_2 <m$. Thus, $r_1 -r_2$ has to be zero, that means $r_1 = r_2$.

$\Leftarrow$: Assume $a \text{ mod } m = b \text{ mod } m$, then we can denote $r,q_1,q_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that 
$$
a = q_1 m + r, b = q_2 m + r \text{ with } 0\leq r < m
$$

Then $a - b = (q_1-q_2)m$, then we know $a -b$ is divisible by $m$. $\square$



**Definition:** The set of all integers congruent to an integer a modulo $m$ is called the **congruence class** of a modulo $m$.



**Theorem:** Let $m$ be a positive integer. If $a \equiv b (\text{mod } m)$ and  $c \equiv d (\text{mod } m)$, then
$$
a +c \equiv b+d (\text{mod } m)
$$

and

$$
ac \equiv bd (\text{mod } m)
$$

**Proof.** From $a \equiv b (\text{mod } m)$ and  $c \equiv d (\text{mod } m)$, we have $\exists z_1,z_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $a -b = z_1 m, c -d = z_2 m$. Hence, we have

$$
(a+c) - (b+d) = (z_1+z_2)m
$$

and

$$
ac = (b+z_1m)(d+z_2m) = bd + (bz_2+dz_1 + z_1z_2m) m
$$

Thus, we have $a +c \equiv b+d (\text{mod } m)$ and $ac \equiv bd (\text{mod } m)$. $\square$

In fact, this theorem is more profound than we thought, we will talk it later after give a corollary. 

**Corollary.** Let $m$ be a positive integer and let $a$ and $b$ be integers. Then

$$
(a + b) \text{ mod } m = ((a \text{ mod } m) + (b \text{ mod } m)) \text{ mod } m
$$

and

$$
ab \text{ mod } m = ((a \text{ mod } m)(b \text{ mod } m)) \text{ mod } m.
$$

Proof: We know that $a \equiv (a \text{ mod } m) \text{ mod } m$ and $b \equiv (b \text{ mod } m) \text { mod } m$. Hence, the above Theorem tells us that 

$$
a + b \equiv (a \text{ mod } m) + (b \text{ mod } m) \text{ mod } m
$$

and

$$
ab \equiv (a \text{ mod } m)(b \text{ mod } m) \text{ mod } m.
$$

We prove this corollary. $\square$



## Ring of Integers Modulo $m$

We can define arithmetic operations on $\mathbb{Z}_m$, that is ${\\{0, 1, ..., m - 1\\}}$. In particular, we define **addition** of these integers, denoted by $+_m$ by

$$
a +_m b = (a + b) \text{ mod } m,
$$

where the addition on the right-hand side of this equation is the ordinary addition of integers, and we define **multiplication** of these integers, denoted by $\cdot_m$ by

$$
a \cdot_m b = (a \cdot b) \text{ mod } m,
$$

where the multiplication on the right-hand side of this equation is the ordinary multiplication of integers. The operations $+_m$ and $\cdot_m$ are called **addition and multiplication modulo** $m$. The above content defines the "addition" and "multiplication" on set $\mathbb{Z}_m$.



The operations $+_m$ and $\cdot_m$ satisfy following properties:



<details><summary>**Closure** If $a$ and $b$ belong to $Z_m$, then $a +_m b$ and $a \cdot_m b$ belong to $Z_m$. </summary>

By definition of reminder, it's trivial to check.
</details>


<details><summary>**Associativity** If $a, b,$ and $c$ belong to $Z_m$, then $(a +_m b) +_m c = a +_m (b +_m c)$ and $(a \cdot_m b) \cdot_m c = a \cdot_m (b \cdot_m c)$.</summary>
**Proof.**

</details>



<details><summary>**Commutativity** If $a$ and $b$ belong to $Z_m$, then $a +_m b = b +_m a$ and $a \cdot_m b = b \cdot_m a$.</summary>

**Proof.**

</details>

<details><summary>**Identity elements** The elements 0 and 1 are identity elements for addition and multiplication modulo $m$, respectively. That is, if $a$ belongs to $Z_m$, then $a +_m 0 = 0 +_m a = a$ and $a \cdot_m 1 = 1 \cdot_m a = a$.</summary>

**Proof.**

</details>

<details><summary> **Additive inverses** If $a \neq 0$ belongs to $Z_m$, then $m - a$ is an additive inverse of $a$ modulo $m$ and $0$ is its own additive inverse. That is $a +_m (m - a) = 0$ and $0 +_m 0 = 0$.</summary>

**Proof.**

</details>

<details><summary> **Distributivity** If $a, b,$ and $c$ belong to $Z_m$, then $a \cdot_m (b +_m c) = (a \cdot_m b) +_m (a \cdot_m c)$ and $(a +_m b) \cdot_m c = (a \cdot_m c) +_m (b \cdot_m c)$.</summary>

**Proof.**

</details>



##  Integer Representations and Algorithms









## Primes and Greatest Common Divisors

## Solving Congruences

## Applications of Congruences

## Cryptography






[^1]:Rosen, K. H. (2007). *Discrete mathematics and its applications*. The McGraw Hill Companies.
